If we wanna do one Yeah.
Bit paper then Yeah. It's this.
If anyone wants to pop it, just sending paper. Yeah.
Just write, write it down and I'll get this on. It's on it.
Way good.
Right. Um, for my thanks for joining us,
we have got 45 minutes, minutes, uh, set aside for this, uh,
hearing into the long term insights briefing.
So I'll let you, um, some
of you obviously were know committee.
I'll let you introduce yourselves
and then if you wanna make some, uh, brief opening remarks
and we'll, we'll open up questions.
Great. I'm, uh, thank you for having us this morning.
Um, my name's, uh, Nick Blakely.
I'm the, uh, CE of mb it of about four weeks.
So, um, pleased to be in the role.
And I'm joined here by, um, Paul Stocks, uh,
deputy secretary from mb, um,
and Van Go, fat, deputy secretary at mfa
and Jeff King, chief, um, at mfa.
And we've got, uh, some of our other colleagues, um, here
as well, um, depending on how, how,
how difficult your questions are
and when we need to, uh, draw on, draw on them as well.
Um, so, uh, this is a joint, um, long-term insights briefing
between our two agencies.
We're really pleased to be here this morning
to, to talk to you about it.
Um, it, uh, recognizes the, the combination
of productivity is the long term economics challenge,
and also the fact that we are in a,
an international environment where we, we must export,
um, for our success.
And so bringing in that international perspective, um,
we went through a process here around literature review,
analysis, um, consultations, round the consultation, um,
to come up with, um, uh, here, if I just sort
of pull out some of the main, um, points that we can then,
um, dig into more, in more depth.
Um, you know, first, uh, productivity growth is at the heart
of, of future prosper disparity.
That's, um, no surprise to to any of you,
but the New Zealand story hasn't been very good, uh,
over the last, um, uh, couple of decades
or so, um, as we've been growing further behind.
And in fact, if anything,
our export mix has been getting less complex rather than
more, which is what you'd hope.
So then lifting productivity will require moving into those
higher growth, higher value areas.
But we're in a world of, uh, global challenges
with the geopolitical shifts that we're now seeing, um,
technological change, environmental pressures,
demographic change.
We've gotta think about our policy making in that context.
Um, and one of the core points in the briefing is that, um,
governments can have a role in both horizontal policies
that is policies that affect the whole economy
and all sectors of the economy.
And then also, uh, vertical policies
where you're looking at a particular area
or a particular sector.
Um, and, um, our argument in the briefing is
that you've still gotta do the horizontal policies.
So as a critical to get right and continue to improve.
Uh, and then as well as that there is a benefit
to looking at some of those vertical areas of the, um,
of policy making and,
and where argument is that, uh,
we haven't been very consistent, uh,
and, um, deliberate over time in New Zealand
about how we've done that.
Um, international connections
and trade is one way of overcoming some of those, uh,
natural, um, disadvantages
that New Zealand has in terms the size and distance.
Uh, and you know, in the briefing we talk about what might
that, um, trade environment look like
for New Zealand in future?
What are some potential scenarios?
And I know Van go will be,
will be very keen to talk about that.
Um, and then we end up in the briefing with a number of, um,
principles for how we think, um, uh, it's good to,
to make these sort of decisions,
taking a long term perspective, being deliberate about
and where the focus is.
Um, and using that range of government policy levers, um,
to, uh, bring about change.
So we are now obviously using these, um,
insights in our policy making,
but really keen to share, um, the,
the thinking in more detail, um,
and really have to open up to questions.
Thank you, your Honor.
Thanks very much. Um, just to make a few observations sort
of from the international trade policy side, um,
I wanna make three observations.
The first on the relationship between trading productivity,
the second on that international environment.
'cause as we were thinking about the long-term insights
briefing, we kind of wanted to factor in
what does that look like?
And then third, to really focus in on one
of the particular case studies that we have in the, um,
in the report, which is on the single current market
and what its future might look like, uh,
the Australian New Zealand one.
So the relationship between, as, as Nick has said,
there is a strong relationship between trade
and productivity and, um, work that the ministry has done.
So the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and trade, uh,
in a working paper underlines
how important that connection is.
So we know that, um,
and exporting firm, uh,
that exports goods has an 89% higher output per worker
than a non-sporting, uh, company.
That productivity gap is even
greater if you're a large firm.
So if you're a large firm of 250 plus
and you're exporting your productivity gap compared
to a non-sport domestic is 130%.
So these are significant.
Uh, there, unfortunately, one of the challenges is
that we are one of the most weakly connected, um,
OECD economies.
Uh, and the OCD says that up to half
or at least half of our poor productivity performs can be
accounted for by this weak international, um,
connectivity that we have.
And then sort of if you think about that connectivity, um,
you then have to think about what the international kind
of trade policy outlook look like.
And I know I've spoken, uh,
before to this committee about that.
Suffice to say, and to use the Canadian Prime Minister's
term, we are facing a rupture.
Uh, there's disorder, there's volatility, there's
increased uncertainty.
And we unfortunately don't see that changing over the period
of the long insights briefing.
In fact, some of that may be exacerbated by, uh,
events largely out of, uh, new Zealand's control.
Um, but I guess what the, the point we look
to make in the insights briefing is
that we do have agency here.
So we are a small state in a world of disorder, uh,
and a state for which the golden weather
for New Zealand trade policy really is over.
But we do have the ability to kind of manage some
of these big risks that are out there.
And that management process includes the free trade
agreements that we've been negotiating.
Um, so one of the factoids that we have in here is
that more than 70% of our exports, uh, are now covered by,
uh, not the World Trade Organization,
but actually these free trade agreements that are in place
that are international treaties
that give us, uh, that scope.
But one thing to say about those free trade agreements, uh,
the great that they are, they are
removing barriers at the border.
The more interesting thing that we need
to be thinking about is what can we do about the
barriers behind the border?
Because the big productivity gains are the dynamic
productivity gains we know from OCD research is by dealing
with the behind the border, uh, barriers.
Once of course, you've got rid of the
more obvious barriers like tariffs and so on.
So that, that brought us then to start thinking about, uh,
how do we think about the deepening integration
of our economy into the region,
but also particularly with Australia.
And we have a terrific existing project, um, with Australia.
Sometimes we forget that the origins of
that was a 1966 New Zealand Australia free trade agreement.
Uh, we would look back on that agreement
and criticize it as a poor quality, low, uh,
coverage agreement.
But over time, that became the foundation stone for, uh,
a key part of our, uh, economy
and certainly a core part of our export focus.
Of course, that's the CER, which is
of course morphed into the single economic market
as we described in the, in the report.
And perhaps there are three elements in the single economic
market that make it really interesting.
There's the freedom movement of people, of course,
there's also the Trans Tasman Mutual recognition
arrangement, which of course focuses on qualifications,
but also on standards for, for goods.
Uh, and the third area is the very interesting work, um,
led out of other agencies including, uh,
colleagues from MB on business law, competition,
policy coordination, and where possible, uh,
looking to align those.
So the question we had as we were thinking about, you know,
what's our future here is what's the future
of the singling home market?
We have kind of, to use a well-worn phrase, we've,
we've squeezed a lot of juice outta that lemon.
There is definitely more juice to be squeezed out of it.
So there are things we can still do in that space
that we deliver benefit both
for Australia and for New Zealand.
But given the international environment
and the challenges we face the sorter out there, uh,
and the challenges we face in some of our key markets,
is it time to think about is the future
of the single economic market only
a determined bilateral is?
Or is it actually about moving it out into the wider region
and thinking about our place in that region?
And the area that we suggest we need
to be thinking about here is the Ian, the 10 Ian countries
they account, they will account for nearly 10%
of the global population.
Um, they're the, a very dynamic and fast growing one.
And they also have their own regional economic integration
project, the Ian Regional economic community.
So the question we ask is, how do we better align ourselves
as a single economic market, Australia
and New Zealand with the 10 economies
as they develop their own trajectory
of regional economic integration?
And that brought us to think about
how could this work in practice?
And we suggest some ways in which we might want
to think about that over the coming years in terms of a kind
of a variable geometry approach.
It's clear we're not talking about integrating
market into Ian, uh, that that is a very long distant,
uh, prospect for, for a range of reasons.
But are there ways that we could more
coherently align ourselves?
Where would we start?
Uh, and what we suggest is perhaps one way to start is
to think about the fact
that we already have a free trade agreement, Australia
and New Zealand with Ian,
it's the Ian Australia New Zealand free trade agreement.
So the key barriers at the border are already gone.
99% of our trade is tariff free, uh, into there.
What more do we need to be doing,
and who would we start with?
And there we argue in the report that a place
to start would be with Singapore.
So are there elements of our existing s market structure
that we could work with Singapore on?
Are there practical areas where there's benefit
for Singapore, benefit for New Zealand, a benefit
for Australia to deepen our integration.
Both of us have enhanced strategic partnership agreements,
uh, both Australia and New Zealand.
With Singapore, we've got all the institutional structures
we need, but do we want to think about that in a more, uh,
creative and future focused, uh, areas?
So that was one of the, the key areas we, we po for, uh,
for us to be thinking about into the future.
Okay. We'll, uh, start with, uh, Han. I Thank you Mr.
Chair. I thank you Tim. Jordan, congratulations.
It's good to see you. Um, the report notes a number
of matters about where we might shift to Singapore, you, me,
um, the other one is defense,
and in particular the way
that we look towards technologies in this space.
Um, a concern that I had in reading that was just how far
behind we might appear to be at least, uh,
on the global stage with respect
to not only defense spending,
but the kind of technologies that people are exploring
that comes to defense.
I wondered if you could just share a little bit
of insight or view into why.
I mean, it's, it's in the report here.
Um, and I know that just last year there was the, uh,
defense, um, industry strategic plan,
which I think is a very good thing.
Um, but to my reading, that's something definitely
for a little bit further down the line.
But you highlighted in here,
I wondered if you had any further reflections on that.
Is it, lemme make a few, um, few, uh, observations.
So o overall, in terms of the structure of our economy, yes,
we're still very dominated by, um, primary, um,
production, primary sector.
That's our natural strength.
Um, what you've seen from, uh,
another small advanced economies is that they maintain
that and they build on that.
And then, um, over time, new other sectors emerge.
And, and that's what we haven't seen as much
of in the New Zealand economy.
So that's one of the, the challenges.
Um, often those sectors will be adjacent in some sense
to those existing sectors, whether, um, so you with, uh,
primary you'd expect, um, agritech and,
and things, bio manufacturing,
things close to those to emerge.
And then of course there are other sectors
that start to emerge as well.
And the New Zealand's, uh, space aerospace, um,
area has been one of those that, um, you know, was a bit
of a shot out of the blue.
You know, it came, you know, really on the back of,
um, Beck's work.
But there is, it's not just Rocket Lab.
There is a quite a large, um, nexus
of companies now emerging.
And so that is an area where, um, we,
we are developing capability.
And so, you know, in our, in terms of our horizontal
and vertical question is, well, what are some of those
vertical, um, levers that government could use
that could further support those areas.
Um, clearly there are, where there might be regulatory, um,
barriers, that's, um, that's something to be considering.
Um, but in the case of, you know, defense tech,
those other levers could be things like, um, science policy
and, and what is the, the science
that's going into that area.
It could be, um, procurement
and defense thinking about, um, what are the types
of capabilities it needs
and where would it look to procure those.
Um, I think defense is now working on a, a tech accelerator,
um, where, um, exploring whether
that could be closely working with the New Zealand Institute
of Advanced Technology so that we can use, again, some
of these other sorts of levers
to help accelerate development in those sectors.
So those are some of the things where we think this thinking
takes us in terms of government's
Response. Excellent.
Janet?
Yeah, I, I was sort of interested in, um,
a bit more about your strategic choice of Singapore as place
for potential integration.
Um, you know, what other, what other kind
of countries were you looking at?
Uh, I think Singapore, there's some obvious things,
you know, relative size, uh, and that kind of thing,
but I was just wonder to know a little bit more
and also, um, what you think
that might look like if we done that track.
Yeah, that's, it's a, it's a great
Question. Um,
and I think it was driven, um, in large part
by the existence of a institutional structures
that we have already that exist, not just between Australia
and New Zealand, but also with Singapore that we don't have
with, uh, with many other partners.
So the, the fact of the series of trade agreements we have
with Singapore, which have increasingly deepened the
integration with us, the fact that during COVID we developed
that supply chains
and post COVID series of supply chains agreement
that more tightly integrate us, uh, with Singapore.
And then, uh, we also were trying to think of, uh,
how would you engage with our Ian colleagues
and what is the best way to do that in a way
that's both efficient and effective
and also would drive productivity back for, for us?
So while there are clearly larger economies in, uh,
in the Ian group, um, working with Singapore
as your starting point is, is an effective way
because, uh, we, we know each other's systems well.
Uh, the existing institutional structure,
so the strategic partnership agreements
that both we in Australia have,
have deepened the integration.
You asked what kinds of things practically.
So for example, you could see a situation where, um,
you'd use the trans Tasman mutual recognition arrangement
as a model for the way in which you'd approach, you know,
what kind of standards does Singapore have on
agricultural products?
What kind of standards do we have on manufacturing products?
Is there a productivity dividend from saying, look,
we recognize yours, uh, so we wouldn't have
to develop our own, that requires a lot of trust
and relationship building and so on.
And as we looked across the 10, uh, Singapore clearly, uh,
emerges as a, as a terrific place to start.
I think the interesting question then becomes,
how much can you do with Singapore?
How does that influence the da the trajectory of
what Ian is also trying to do?
So Ana is the,
the Ian Regional economic community is very determined not
to be an EU project, EU style project.
So they're not willing to give up sovereignty.
So what kind of economic
integration are they thinking about?
And what we think is that the way in which we've done that
with Australia without, by preserving our sovereignty,
but having these shared arrangements, that
that might be a model that asan might
find, uh, useful as well.
And proof of concept would be through the work
that we were able to do with, um, with Singapore.
So you can see, for example,
the work we might do in the green technology space.
Um, uh, you know, if you're filing, uh,
your securities offerings in one country,
could you file it in all three?
That, those kinds of things that would be practical benefits
for business, uh, quickly are other kinds of things
that we're driving our, our thinking there.
But it is really about also trying to make sure that, uh,
the relevance, the economic relevance of New Zealand
continues to rise
and be amplified by the engagement
with our as young colleagues.
Uh, I think they're important lessons
to be learned from the way that Swiss, the Norwegians,
Lichtenstein and Iceland
and the European free trade area have tried
to align themselves, not integrate,
but align themselves with, uh, the European Union
and looking to have influenced themselves on
that emerging structure
to protect their own national interest.
Yeah. Um, just just a follow up question.
Um, was the way that they, uh,
sort of navigate relationship with China, did
that factor into your thinking?
I matter? Yeah, yeah.
No, no, it's, it's, it's a fair question.
Um, in, in this case, no, that wasn't a, a driver.
We were looking at the, at the economics of this. Okay.
Um, rather than the geopolitics, um,
the geopolitics is certainly a, an element
that we're always having to think about,
particularly given the behavior
that we've seen recently from, from major economies.
Uh, so that sense, the driver has been, yes,
there is a geopolitical element,
but not so much the Singapore China piece,
but more generally and the need for a small state like ours
to build its own resilience.
So our, our strategy in the trade world has been three pass
rules, uh, resilience and innovation.
And so that resilience piece is all about kind
of positioning the economy to kind of manage
and mitigate some of that turbulence that's out there.
And we see the, the deepening of the single joint market
and the, uh, expansion out
through a variable geometry approach as one way
to, to tackle that. Um, why this,
Um, I was kind of shocked to see a, um, chart recently,
which talked about if there was an invasion of ti of Taiwan,
just how economically disruptive that was.
I had underestimated that in these plans,
how I, I totally appreciate what you're saying,
but in terms of keeping things in different baskets,
I think we've learned that it's so unstable out there,
we need a lot of baskets.
So I appreciate picking a region,
but how have you balanced that,
having different areas?
So if one is disrupted, we have other areas which are safer.
I mean, from a general economic point of view,
you might talk on the, the countryside,
but I think your point about diversification
is, uh, is a good one.
And we would agree, um, with that.
And when you have a look at our, um, export mix, whether
that's on sectors or on, um, uh, countries,
and that we ex export to, uh, we're still very concentrated,
uh, in primary production and in private production
To, To China.
Um, and so for all sorts of reasons, um, uh, that,
um, different parts of the world would be growing at
different times, it's good to have diversification across
your economy that that gets you resilience.
So we would agree with the point, and that's partly why, um,
and seeing the economy develop in ways
that develop out these different sectors over time,
we think is a positive, um, for productivity, but also
because it builds in.
So that's a general, um, development of the economy.
But do you wanna talk about Yeah,
I mean, this is very much a, a focus of ours and,
and I think the way to see what I talked about terms,
the single income market is part of a wider strategy.
Um, so this creation of optionality, uh,
or diversification as like I said,
has been a really important driver of
what we've been trying to do.
Uh, so there's been a long history
of New Zealand being over concentrated in particular
markets, in particular products, going back
to the relationship with the British.
Yeah. Um, important lessons learned from that.
And now we're in another world where, um, some of our
longstanding friends
and partners aren't behaving the way we would like them to,
and so we're having to kind of
create more optionality there.
And that's been, so if you think about less than 10 years
ago, uh, about 40 to 50%
of our exports were covered by trade agreement.
We've now lifted that.
And part of that has been designed to say to businesses, um,
China is a really important market, uh,
and you've got tariff preferences, in other words,
advantages over your competitors in there
because of the free trade agreement.
But now for the first time,
you can have another look at the eu,
you can have another look at the UK
where we have not had advantages.
We have not had a level, but we do now.
And we're saying to business,
you need to have a look at that as well.
And I think the recently concluded,
India free trade agreement is in a similar kind of area
where we're trying to create optionality.
So another large market middle class in India will be
500 million people that's larger than the eu.
It's larger than the tenian countries.
Here's a, a a place where you might be able to compete now
for the first time, again on a level playing,
but it's about creating that optionality.
But it's not just about negotiating agreements,
it's also about the implementation of them
and making sure that businesses take advantage,
full advantage of them, that they're cited on the
opportunity and that they could utilize
them, uh, as much as they can.
So a big part of the work that we do across agencies,
not just, uh, in fact, but N-P-I-N-B, uh, customs
and so on, is to help business access those other
opportunities to help them diversify,
uh, and manage their risk.
Um, Laura Cle,
Um, thank you. You kind of
started answering my question.
Um, to supplement from that, I am out there talking
to businesses all the time, um,
and I think there is like an, a empathy
or a, a view, um, that is different to ours.
I don't think the risk is so apparent to our businesses.
Um, are you guys doing any work, like whether it's
with NZTE, um, to talk to, um, exporters
and then about, um, you know, their market resilience
and the geopolitical risks
and how to make sure that they, whether
that's things coming in, um, to, man, I know like a lot
of imports come in from certain places to be able
to manufacture here in New Zealand Zealand or exporting out.
Um, and when I talk to 'em about it, they're always like,
oh, yeah, like really surprised
or like, haven't really thought about that.
And these, some of these like, are big exporters.
So, um, is there any work in that space to, um,
sort of create that kind of like resilience?
I mean, obviously we promote the other trade agreements,
but you know, the messaging around why that is so important,
and I think
Yeah. But maybe to make
three, three points.
I mean, it is concerning to hear that, um,
my own impression is that, um, businesses are realizing
that the world has really fundamentally changed.
There have been a series of shocks, sorry. Oh, no, no, no.
After you finish. Um, there have been a series
of shocks to our system, um, not just the United States,
but we mustn't forget that the way China recently dealt
with Australia was a reminder to us
that the big guys really are playing outside the rules, uh,
and that that really is painful and risk.
And so we saw what happened to Australia, uh, we saw
what happened to their crayfish exports,
to their coal exports, uh, to their wine exports.
I mean, they've literally stopped over 48 hours.
Uh, and that did not resume, uh, for nearly 18 months
to two years, depending on the product we're talking about.
So the message to business has been,
look at what's happening,
and you do need to be thinking about that.
So there have been a series of sort of public engagements
and ministerial speeches, uh, presentations
that we've been making, and we've looked to present
that ft a strategy in that vein
of trying to create those optionality.
Look, the second area that I encourage people to look at is,
um, well, thanks to Jeff's scene, we,
we produce market intelligence reports.
Mm-hmm. And those market intelligence reports highlight, uh,
first of all the rising geopolitical risk
and the challenge for New Zealand exporters,
but they also try in a very practical way
to identify opportunities for those exporters, uh,
as they, as they go out.
So the, the management of that risk is very important.
I, I mean, you, you know,
when you meet New Zealand companies, often they,
their real focus is meeting payroll next week,
the challenges that they, that they have.
But at the same time, as we've seen with the United States,
when President Trump raised the tariff, uh,
know effectively from less than 2% on New Zealand to 10
and then to 15, that has been a brutal shock to a whole lot
of businesses that thought, yeah,
nothing to worry about here.
We've got certainty into the US market.
Uh, that was a reminder, I think,
that there is no certainty in this world now.
And that combination, I think I, I'd like to think,
is forcing businesses to think really about that.
And what we are trying to do as, as government, is to kind
of find ways to support them both in the implementation
of the FDA's highlighting the risk,
the market intelligence reporting that
that's free, you know?
Mm-hmm. Two businesses on our, on our websites.
So regular, so readable format's, not,
not our usual in fact contribution.
Nice. Google that. I'm gonna send people your way.
Help. Can I just, um, add, um, the, yeah.
There's no doubt that New Zealand's benefited hugely from
the, the rules based, um, system.
Mm-hmm. Um, uh,
and obviously it's going to be brutal in, uh, in, in,
uh, AL'S words.
Um, but we have to think about
what are the opportunities in that for New Zealand.
So from an economic security lens,
a lot more focus on economic security,
um, for countries around the world.
And there are things that New Zealand produces
that other countries are very interested in.
Obviously food has always been one of those, and, and,
and we're very good at making, uh, uh, food,
but they're increasingly,
you talked about defense technologies.
S some is, is, um, exporting into the, into the uk.
Um, you've got, uh, areas of critical minerals,
which I know has been in the, in, in the vape recently.
Those are areas where the rest of the world is looking for
what could New Zealand play in that.
So we'd encourage looking at what could be the opportunities
in this new world, even though, um, you know, it won't be
as, uh, as plain sailing as the previous world. Mm-hmm.
Okay. We've so got 15 minutes.
I'm tracking Tiana, Melissa in Pny.
So are they sub new questions? Sort
Of, sort of sub Yeah, I think everyone sort of sucks.
Okay. So I'm gonna, in that case, we're up to me first,
but then it's pni Melissa, uh, sorry.
Ano, uh, Melissa Penny. So we've got 15 minutes left.
I just wanted to ask about some of your case
studies that were in there.
Um, 'cause you talked before in response to us, uh, one
of the questions about sort of some of those countries,
Stein on the side of the EU and how they're aligning.
But in a, in the Finland example, I think it was,
you talked about how they were sort of on the fringe, uh,
geographically, and so they'd moved from
commodity to knowledge.
Um, we, we we're obviously far more on the fringe
geographically, and that offers some strength in terms
of a changing world in terms
of security and domestic policy.
But when it comes to international parade, that's a, perhaps
that strength becomes a challenge.
Um, and I'm just wondering where you see the opportunities,
if we think long term Denmark example had sort
of the triple helix with the investment into academia.
Singapore, you also talked about
growing that knowledge base.
Is that an area we need to be looking at?
We, you know, we can't live off commodities, um,
even high value ones like crayfish, but, you know, dairy
and protein, we can't live off that forever.
Where is the opportunity for New Zealand?
How do we exploit the advantages we have without them
becoming our greatest weakness?
I can start there as well.
Um, I, I think the, you know, our main point here is
that the way economies evolve is to look
for those adjacencies.
So it will be some of those sectors
that builds on our traditional strengths,
but then, um, uses technology to look for new areas.
And that is your agritech, um, your biomanufacturing.
Um, uh, you know, at biomedical we have very strong, um, uh,
you know, health technologies emerging sector as well.
So it's looking for where are those areas
of New Zealand's strength,
and then how could, uh, a combination of, um,
government policy levers help support, um,
an acceleration of those.
So, you know, we talk about obviously space in advanced, um,
aviation here, but it is about trying to look
for those opportunities and, you know, the case studies
that is what those other small advanced economies have done,
many of those islands, Finland, built on primary, um,
sector, and then have developed those
and also, um, found new sectors to evolve as well.
Yeah, there's a degree of path to PC here.
Um, and I suppose the old saying is, keep on doing
what you did, you'll get the same thing.
So, uh, our primary sectors didn't evolve by accident.
We put a lot of support into them over many years, uh,
through the science system, through the way
that we've approached our trade agreements.
Uh, and so what started as a natural advantage,
we actually built on, and, you know, put, as I say, all
of our research and, and investment around that,
we put our trade diplomats
to make sure we had free trade agreements.
That's brilliant. And we are
operating really, really well there.
But we do need to think about, uh, what kind of support like
that would we put around our emerging industries.
So as Nick says, there are adjacencies like agritech,
you'd think about, well,
in the advanced managed capturing space, uh,
how do you use our public research organizations to,
to work on that, uh, in the areas of, you know, um, it
actually, new Zealand's had quite a large, uh,
growth in services, uh,
and services is an area where, uh,
people transport notwithstanding distance doesn't make such
a huge impact.
So, uh, we, we are focusing as well as the horizontal lever
as well as market integrations.
Uh, and as a side issue there, um, one
of the things I'm responsible for is competition policy.
Uh, and our view largely is it's very hard
to drive a thriving competition in a
country of 5 million people.
But if you can think about conceptually expanding your
borders, the ECM to the Australian markets, to,
to Singapore, et cetera, and having the systems
and standards in place that look very, very similar,
then actually you've essentially expanded your domestic
markets to 30, 40, 50 million people kind of overnight.
So I think as to Nick's point, we, we do need
to think about both our horizontal, our systems,
our standards, but also where the support we put in
for things like public research, like our universities,
et cetera, to support those new emerging industries.
Can I, I think Jeff, to make a little observational
Yeah. Just to make a,
a little point,
because your point is really valid.
One, we've seen in our traditional export mix,
in our economic, um, uh, uh, building blocks
of distance being a problem.
Um, and that's because it's commodity based.
Um, and our markets are far away.
And I think, you know, just drawing on what, um,
Paul was saying is there are plenty of industries, um,
and export opportunities where that's not a problem.
And it's in these sort of areas of, you know, new, new areas
of growth, technology, information, technology services, um,
high value services by a far, um, our,
our location in the world is not a competitive,
it's not a competitive disadvantage there.
Hmm. It's an advantage.
And, um, and so, you know, drawing on that, when we look at
where we can, um, compete effectively
or build, look to, uh, provide, um, an operating environment
to allow industries to grow and
and thrive, um, that very problem might be a thing that, um,
is our, our competitive advantage when we're competing.
Um, you know, in and
We often talk about services.
Can you just give us, uh, one
or two like really bite size examples? Is this like zero?
Yes. Um, exactly. Or even even
Gaming. I mean,
the gaming sector has been one that's, um,
is still very small, but has seen extraordinary
growth, um, in recent years.
And that's probably come on the back as well of, um,
the investment in creative digital, um, with, uh,
the film film sector.
So you're seeing some crossover and skills
and an ecosystem starting to build there
And A rebate. Yeah,
The rebate certainly, um,
helps stop the sector moving to Australia.
Exactly. But
If you look at the credits of any large Hollywood film,
uh, most of the special effects tend
to be done in New Zealand, and that's the services export.
Thank you. Um, Tiana.
Yeah, um, I mean that part, you're part of the answer One,
my question I was thinking about, um, resource focus.
Um, so the impact on on distance, uh, on, on resource focus.
Um, 'cause I again agree with what you're saying in terms
of being able to focusing, hence the, uh,
that look at Singapore, which I found interesting.
Um, so I wonder if you, if you could talk
to us a little bit more about how you, about
that resource focus distance being one element which you
kind of covered, um,
and whether you look to any anywhere else.
So, you know, so just getting in the other direction,
chilling Peru, um, uh,
and whether that factored into any of your thinking.
'cause I, I mean, my, my feeling is if you don't,
we're gonna do something, you wanna make sure that it lands
and you don't want to fire off in every direction,
but sort of in my direction,
See?
Yeah, I mean, um, maybe to make a couple
of observations on it, I mean, one of the, one
of the features of the case studies is there are some common
themes, but one of them is a sort of a long term focus
that goes, you know,
multiple governments doing the same thing, sort
of agreeing on the direction of travel.
And the second then is also the way in which, uh,
we would need to be thinking about where the resource
pressures and uh, which I think is your, yeah.
Is your point. So, absolutely Chile, uh,
has always been a close partner
of ours in the, in the trade sphere.
Uh, the P four, one of our first agreements was with, um,
with Chile, the P four, uh, which of course became CCP,
TVP to the future.
So that relationship has always been a critical component.
I guess what we were trying to do
with a single economy market case study is not, say
these other places are not worthy of it.
What we're saying with this, this particular set, Australia
and New Zealand deepening the integration there
and then looking at what we might do with Singapore
and the other asan regional economic community as it grows,
that, that in terms of the long term play
may have the greater productivity dividend for us than um,
uh, Peru or, or Chile and so on.
We do have trade agreements with all, with all
of those countries that you've mentioned, either
through CPT p or through other, uh, arrangements with them.
Um, so they are an important part
of the way in which we think about the world.
But what we are saying here is in terms of that long term,
where should we be investing the discretionary effort
and, you know, for our money, uh,
thinking about the deepening
of the single income market is the one to,
to think about. And, and just to follow
Up from that, because you were talking about optionality.
Um, so where, where would you think the other kind
of next couple of cabs off the rank, if
of your thinking might be?
So I sort of an international space.
Um, I, I guess I would make two observations.
The first would be, so we've got 70% of our trade covered by
sort of very orthodox trade agreements.
So there's still 30% missing.
Uh, and then there's the, the missing piece word, countries,
we really don't export very much to,
but are likely to be part of the future.
So for a start, the fact
that we don't have a free trade agreement
with the United States, that's a gap.
Uh, I'm not sure how we get one, uh,
under the current circumstances,
but nevertheless, that is clearly a gap given
that it's our second most important
export destination at present.
The other big gap in our strategies, of course, Africa, uh,
where we don't have any institutional structures
and that's clearly going to be a powerhouse
and there's going to be a big, uh, consumption interest
for some of the products we, we are interested in.
So in terms of the orthodox trade agreements
that we might wanna do, in other words, dealing
with barriers at the border, those are clearly some
of the options we would probably wanna be thinking about.
But in terms of driving the,
really the dynamic productivity gain, I do come back
to the fact that you do need
to think about your deeper integration to go to the points
that Paul and Nick have been making about expanding.
Uh, and that's really where the big benefits are.
And, and maybe just, I mean, just to one of the, um, yeah,
announcements just in the last few weeks was around, uh,
reinforcing our agreement with Australia around standards.
And that's, that's one example where, you know,
our view would be too often in New Zealand we try
and design our own things, uh,
and that makes it, um, harder for, um, competition
to emerge from, uh, having the same things that
businesses can operate in
Australia and operate in
New Zealand. You might wanna add to that.
Well, well again, it's, it's, it is that concept
of a single market.
Uh, and nobody really wants to try
to learn the specific technicalities of a set
of New Zealand regulations that apply
to 5 million people if they could just use the Australian
ones, for example, and export to 35 million.
So what we've been looking at across the board is when do we
need things that are specific, tailor made
for our certain circumstances in New Zealand?
And there are some things that are very specific
outside the city, for example, is one thing, you know,
the the, the nature of our, uh,
te treaty relationships, for example, is another one.
But there's a large range of things who are actually,
we are not that different from anyone else.
And if I think about the, the building product space,
for example, where we've now said, look,
we will accept from like-minded jurisdictions
that have good regulatory systems, uh, if a uh,
plumbing pipe is accepted in Europe
or Australia, then that's good enough for us
and we will accept that without having to do a whole bunch
of work to to to, to assess that particular pipe itself.
And that does two things. It creates huge opportunities
for consumers to access a broader range
of products at cheap prices.
And it makes it easier for our firms when they're producing
things 'cause they're operating to the same standards.
So it actually is both an import, uh,
benefit and an export benefit.
And in an increasingly connected world,
the way in which we think about ourselves connected
to markets, um, Bangal has lowered the trade barriers.
Now how do we actually operate, um, really effectively
with the same set of rules? I think
We've just got time for Melissa to leave.
Um, I don't know if that's gonna be really, really short.
I was really interested in what thing Alice had
to say in terms of the way that we connect the, uh, the lack
of connection after the borders are actually sorted
with the trademarks.
So what kind of strategy do you have in terms of making
that work for us?
And I give Singapore
and Korea for example, Singapore decided that they wanted
to be a biomedical science hub
and they started off with an, uh, infrastructure, um,
building buildings like bios back in two, early 2000.
And they effectively brought the world's biomedical research
into Singapore and they became, they had this strategy,
I think it was like a four, uh, four phase strategy.
Korea decided that they actually wanted to be a cultural,
I don't know, whatever it was,
but they actually had this plan going back almost 20 years.
And they now have a strategy for, um, to become like,
what top 10 cultural, um, country in the world.
And they have K-pop, K drama, K, beauty, k, k food,
everything became something that was so strategized
that the world now knows K-pop, K drama, K beauty,
K medicine, all that sort of stuff.
So in terms of our plant, not just productivity,
but in terms of selling not just New Zealand products,
but New Zealand globally, we actually need
to be less myopic.
I like to sort of hear what you think
Maybe can, can I start on that?
And I I think you're, you put your finger on exactly the,
the, the big point in this which is being deliberate
and consistent over time, um, about where you've,
you've got areas of strength that you wanna develop, um,
that can, can yield, um, significant benefits.
And New Zealand has tended to be more fragmented, uh,
and um, inconsistent over time.
Um, so that is the core point
of the report is we should be doing more like, like that.
Um, obviously in the New Zealand way,
they also put quite a lot of funding into that.
We may have, um, we may be needed to rely more on regulatory
or science or other levers
and be, you've got a whole range of levers
and really focusing on what are those areas
that we really want.
Make sure we remove barriers and, and and,
and get the settings right.
That's the, that's the key thing we're saying.
Yeah. Do you, do you have anything?
Uh, well I would only say, well I think there is a,
a very strong domestic economic policy question there.
And it is about making sure that there's,
between your science, innovation, education system,
your immigration system, all
of those domestic policy leaders are pulling in the same way
so that you can position yourself international.
But the key thing that really comes out of this,
the case studies is that long term thinking.
And that is something that we struggle at
Because sometimes I hear people talking globally,
internationally, international friends, they sort
of look at New Zealand, like it's an SME hodgepodge
of SMEs is actually trying
to actually ca capture the world's attention.
Whereas, you know, other countries actually have big major,
you know, companies that are actually, you know, competing,
uh, against each other.
And we become a very small player
in the international market.
I mean, that's exactly right.
And so then the, the key policy, nothing
Wrong with SMEs, but Well,
but it would be nice to have some more large, uh, yeah.
And firms competing on the global stage,
we effectively only have one very large
firm and that's fontera.
And then going back to Paul's point, um, you know,
we make the, we've, we've batched the primary sector,
we've used the full range of levers at government's disposal
to support that sector and it's been very successful.
Um, if we took a more deliberate approach to some
of these other emerging areas of advantage,
what could we achieve with that?
You have, Thank you. Thank you very much.
I'm fortunate we're out off time there
and I am gonna keep your time, so, um, appreciate your time.
Fascinating subject. We could probably go on
for another hour, easily, easily.
Um, I'm sure we'll see you again soon.
Uh, thanks for your time and thank you very much.